The Project Gutenberg eBook of Grateful Peter's new year's gift
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Grateful Peter's new year's gift

Author: Ruth Lamb


        
Release date: March 4, 2026 [eBook #78109]

Language: English

Original publication: London: The Religious Tract Society, 1888

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78109


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRATEFUL PETER'S NEW YEAR'S GIFT ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



[Illustration: "REMEMBER THIS IS GOD'S DAY."]



                           Little Dot Series.
                            ——————————————


                           GRATEFUL PETER'S

                           NEW YEAR'S GIFT.


                                 BY

                              RUTH LAMB

               AUTHOR OF "COMFORTABLE MRS. CROOK," ETC.


                            [Illustration]


                    THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY:
          56, PATERNOSTER ROW; 65, ST. PAUL'S CHURCHYARD;
                        AND 164, PICCADILLY.



[Illustration]



                            [Illustration]

                               CONTENTS.

                            [Illustration]

CHAP.

   I. AN UNEXPECTED PRESENT

  II. RUN OVER

 III. GLAD TIDINGS

  IV. NEW HOMES



[Illustration]



                           GRATEFUL PETER'S

                           NEW YEAR'S GIFT.

                            [Illustration]

CHAPTER I.

An Unexpected Present.

[Illustration] ON the last evening of the year, the snow was falling
heavily, and the same shrill wind that howled and whistled through the
keyholes and roared in the chimneys was whirling the white flakes round
the heads of the few people to be found in the streets.

What a night it was! That piercing wind laid hold of all the
passengers. Some it drove onwards, nearly lifting them off their feet;
others it forced backwards, making them fight for every inch of the way
through the snow which it flung in their faces.

Umbrellas were of no use that night. Those who tried to use the frail
shelters of silk or alpaca saw them turned into playthings by that
unruly pitiless wind. Glad were they to furl them tightly again, though
in many cases they only managed to carry home a battered bundle of
broken ribs and silk. Nobody that could help it would be out of doors
at all.

"I wish I weren't forced to be out," thought a little fellow called
Peter Grant, as, tired with battling against the wind, he leaned
against some railings to regain breath. "And it's little use stopping
out. I've only taken three coppers to-night. Who'd stay to buy baked
taters in this snow and wind? I've shouted myself hoarse, and nobody
stops to listen. If plenty of folks were out, the wind wouldn't let
them hear me."

Peter Grant was twelve years old, and a baked-potato merchant. He had
a home—if that poor cellar in Number Three Court, Back Potter Street,
could be called one—and he possessed what all great and rich people do
not—a true friend. While Peter is leaning against the railings, I will
tell you his story, so far as he can remember it.

Peter Grant was only a trotting thing of four years old when he lost
his father, and from the neat little home they had been accustomed to,
he and his mother were obliged to remove to one room in the court I
have mentioned. Peter's mother went out washing and working; but a day
came when she returned earlier than usual because she was too ill to
finish her work.

Old Sally Graham, who lived in the cellar, used to take care of Peter
during his mother's absence. She loved the little fellow dearly, and
was Mrs. Grant's faithful nurse until, after a fortnight's illness,
Peter was left motherless too. There was a talk of taking Peter to the
workhouse, but his tears and Old Sally's pleadings induced the parish
officers to give her a little weekly sum. So he stayed on with the only
friend who loved him and could talk to him of his mother.

Perhaps it would have been better for Peter if he had been taken to the
workhouse. There he would have had good plain schooling, and have been
put to some regular trade. As it was, he grew up very ignorant.

Being a sharp lad, and eager to learn, he had somehow got to read
pretty well, partly taught by other lads, partly by old Sally. He
knew just so much of figures as a boy who sells small articles in the
streets and goes on errands must obtain by every-day practice. Sally
was too ignorant to teach Peter more than this.

As to God, religion, the Bible, church, or Sunday-school, neither she
nor the boy ever looked on these things as concerning them at all. To
be sure, Peter heard the bells calling people to the house of God on
Sundays. And sometimes, when tempted out of Number Three Court into the
wider streets, where on other days, he cried "Baked taters," he could
see well-dressed folk going into the churches and chapels. But he only
looked wonderingly at their nice clothes, and never thought of taking
part himself.

Sunday! What was Sunday to Peter? I'll tell you, children. It was
the day on which Peter had a clean shirt, and on which he often went
without a jacket while Sally mended it, and he played at marbles out in
the court with other lads. Sunday! Well, there was a little difference
between it and other days. They had a bit of warm meat for dinner when
they could, and Peter did not go out selling.

At one time, Peter plied his trade on Sundays the same as on other
days. But on a particular Sunday evening in early autumn, as he was
shouting to the passers-by to purchase "rosy apples three a penny," a
gentleman said something to him which stopped his Sunday trading. Peter
always remembered that gentleman's face. It was kind, though grave,
and his hair was white, but his eyes were bright and his cheeks ruddy.
Peter had pushed his hand full of apples in front of the gentleman,
and, in his bold way, asked him to buy.

"No, my boy; I do not buy, and you should not sell, on Sundays," was
the answer. "Do you not know this is God's day?"

Peter stared open-mouthed, and the gentleman went on speaking. "I was
once a poor boy, and I believe I should be a poor man now if I had not
been content to work on six days, and give the seventh part of my time
to God. You have a ragged jacket. Do you expect to buy a good coat out
of money earned on Sundays?"

Peter looked ruefully at his ragged jacket as the gentleman named it.
He had been long vainly trying for a new one.

"I didn't know, sir," he stammered out; "I'm an honest lad, sir. I work
hard for my living, and other lads and men too work o' Sundays as well
as me."

"Did you not know it was wrong to sell and tempt people to buy on
Sundays? If other people do wrong that does not make you right. You may
be honest to your fellow-creatures, but you are robbing God of the day
that belongs to Him. Do you go to school?"

"Can't afford it, sir."

"What is your father?"

"Haven't got one, sir; nor mother neither. I live with old Sally
Graham, and she's a very good friend, sir. She always says I must never
steal nor tell lies, nor do anything to get took up by the police."

This was about the sum of Sally's moral teachings.

Poor Sally! She could not tell him of the loving Father in heaven,
who has said He is "a Father of the fatherless." Neither had Peter
ever heard of that dear Saviour who held out His tender arms for the
children whom Jewish mothers brought to seek His blessing. Sally could
not repeat the sweet invitation, "Suffer the little children to come
unto Me, and forbid them not," or tell him that he too might go to the
same dear Saviour, and be sure of a welcome.

The gentleman seemed to understand Peter's position from these answers
of his. He was one who had been raised from poverty to a high and
honourable position, and he delighted to help others.

So he thought, "I will do something for this lad. Poor, ignorant,
fatherless, motherless, living without hope and without God in the
world, where could I find a better object to work on?"

Turning to Peter, he said, "Where do you live, my boy?"

"At Number Three Court, Back Potter Street—end house, sir, right-hand
side."

"And what is your name?"

"Peter Grant; and I live with Sally Graham."

The white-haired gentleman wrote down Peter's name and address on a
slip of paper, which he put into his purse for safety, and then said,
"Do you think you would make sixpence more by selling apples to-night?"

"Oh dear no, sir; maybe twopence or threepence at most."

"Then take this sixpence. Go home, and try to remember this is God's
day."

"Yes, sir," said Peter.

"I shall keep this paper, and you will most likely see me again."

"Thank you, sir," said Peter, and he touched his cap as the gentleman,
with a kind good-night, turned away.

Peter at once started homeward, resolved that this unexpected windfall
should buy an extra good cup of tea and a quarter of lump sugar for old
Sally.

Poor and ignorant as Peter was, he was a truly loving grateful lad. He
was not able to do much in return for his friend's kindness, but he did
what he could.

Is it so with you, dear child-readers? Are you grateful to the parents
who load you with so many marks of tenderness? Do you give them ready,
joyful obedience, or deny yourselves for their sakes? And when you keep
Christmas, feasting on good things, or delighting in your pretty gifts,
while you watch the blazing lights on the Christmas-tree, decked by
loving hands, what is your chief thought? Do you think of the gifts, or
the Chief Giver? Of the pretty presents, or of Him who gave His dear
Son that you, believing in Him, might have pardon and life?

Old Sally was standing at the end of the court when Peter returned home.

"You're home soon, Peter; are you sold out?" she asked.

"No; but a gentleman gave me sixpence, and said I mustn't sell on
Sundays. And he wrote my name on a paper, and said I should see him
again."

Sally asked many questions, considering that a person who bestowed
sixpence without being asked for it, and held out hopes of future
favours, was worth inquiring about. Peter told her all that had passed,
described his appearance, from his gold-rimmed spectacles down to his
quick firm step, and finished by saying, "He told me he was once a poor
boy, too."

"That made the gentleman give you sixpence. When folks have known what
it is to work for their money, they think about others; they know how
hard it is to make ends meet if they keep honest."

"He had the sort of face you say it does you good to look at; and I
should like to see him again," said Peter.

"I hope you will, then. But oh, dear me! Gentlefolks often promise
things and forget all about 'em. I daresay they mean to keep them, but
other things come in the way, and they forget."

"But this gentleman did not look as if he would."

"Maybe not. To my mind, they're much of a muchness, as the saying is. I
never saw one I could altogether trust to."

(No, Sally; because the eyes of your understanding have not yet been
opened to see Him whose "word is truth," and who, having promised, is
ever faithful to perform.)

Peter gave Sally all the money he had taken, but kept back the
sixpence. Though short of many things, she did not ask for it, but
hoped he would save it towards the price of a new jacket. But he only
thought of her comfort. He would have gone then to buy the tea and
sugar, but he remembered that if it were not right for him to sell
apples on Sunday, neither was it for others to sell tea and sugar.

It was hard work to keep the sixpence, when he saw how few grains of
tea were left in the wide-necked bottle which did duty as a caddy. But
he did keep it.

On Monday morning, he bought with it an ounce of tea, a quarter of
sugar, and a bloater. He had the happiness of seeing his old friend
enjoy her breakfast, though she exclaimed, "Eh, Peter, you'll never get
a jacket if you spend all your money for me."

The boy ran off to his business, very happy at the thought of Sally's
good breakfast. Many times he wondered if the white-haired gentleman
would find Back Potter Street; it was such an out-of-the-way place. And
then the question, "Will he try?" suggested itself.

He pictured again the kind face, answered the question, "Yes, I'm sure
he will," then made extra haste to be home early.

He reached home out of breath, and gasped out, "Has the gentleman been?"

"No, Peter," answered Sally; "and if I was you, I wouldn't think too
much about him. If he comes, it will be all right; and if doesn't, you
will be less disappointed."


So many a day passed, and no gentleman came. Peter's heart sank within
him when days grew into months.

And old Sally said, "I told you how it would be, Peter; there's no
trusting to anybody's promises."

Peter sadly confessed that Sally was right, adding, "If that gentleman
could go and say a thing just to disappoint a poor lad, I wouldn't
trust anybody."

Still, the gentleman's words influenced Peter almost without his
knowing it. He did not go to church or school, but, on the other
hand, he neither bought nor sold on Sundays. It was not so much the
words about God and the Sabbath that lingered in his mind. But he did
remember the question, "Do you ever expect to earn a good coat with
what you get by selling on Sundays?"

Of respect for God's day Peter knew nothing. But the ever-present need
of a new jacket in place of his ragged one made every word relating
to it of great importance. Somehow he felt that if he were to work
on Sundays, he should have no luck. On the other hand, he looked for
the new jacket as a reward which he deserved for giving up his Sunday
business.

He was confirmed in the belief when his own and old Sally's combined
savings did amount to enough for the purchase of a warm suit of
second-hand clothes. In these garments, he was clothed on that cold
December night—the last of the year—when we left him standing against
the railings, amid the falling snow and piercing wind.

We must go back to him now. It is well he does not really stand there
expecting us, is it not, dear children? Or he would be weary with
remaining so long in the cold.

[Illustration]



CHAPTER II.

Run Over.

[Illustration] THROUGH snow and wind, various sounds reached Peter's
ears that New Year's Eve. He was not far from a large church—and oh,
how merrily the bells were ringing! He knew what they were pealing so
joyously for, and he meant to sit up and let in the new year to their
poor cellar in Number Three Court, Back Potter Street.

Peter had been very anxious to do business that night, for he had been
saving a penny at a time to buy old Sally a woollen comforter as a
new year's gift. It was nearly paid for at the little shop where they
dealt, and he meant it for a grand surprise.

As he turned over his few coppers, he rejoiced that he had enough for
that; and he knew the morrow's wants were supplied already. But Peter
heard other sounds between the pealing of the church bells. There was a
children's party inside the house, and, as he stood leaning against the
railings, their merry voices came ringing in his ears.

The little potato merchant felt inclined to envy the happy youngsters
as he heard their pattering feet rushing from dining-room to hall and
back again. The happy children meanwhile cared nothing for piercing
cold or fast-falling snow outside. How should they? The fire was
blazing cheerfully for them, kind friends had prepared a feast to
gratify their childish appetites, and were even now adding to the sport
by joining in it.

Papa, hot and panting, is playing the "blind man," and is dragged about
by the arms, the coat-tails—anything, in fact, that can be laid hold
of—while perhaps one tiny thing, contrary to all the rules of the game,
is pushing herself in front of him, and shouting,—

"Please, catch me!"

Mamma, just as useful, plays tunes that set the little feet drumming on
the floor, or does "Magic music" better than anybody else. And all the
while, her motherly eye is on the alert to watch against accident to
any of the young guests. All these knew nothing, or thought nothing of
other little ones, just as able to enjoy these pleasures as themselves,
but shut out by poverty from them all.

Of course, nobody could have guessed that little Peter Grant was
leaning against the railings outside, shivering, in spite of his
improved clothing, and very down-hearted because the storm was
interfering with his trade, and he should carry home an unsold stock
and very little money.

The boy lingered longer than he intended. In spite of himself, he was
fascinated by those merry voices, which raised a longing in his mind to
form one amongst such a company. But at length there came a lull, and
he could hear nothing. The truth was, the youngsters were all sitting
down to table to enjoy the nice things provided for them, though
Peter could not see them through the closed shutters. Only a line of
ruddy light strewing through a narrow chink hinted at the warmth and
brightness within.

If Peter had waited a little longer, he would have heard the voices
again, louder than ever, when the blazing dish of "snap-dragon" came
in, and the crackers began to explode. And, later still, he would have
heard the young voices rise in a simple hymn of praise to Him who had
brought them all in peace and safety to the threshold of the new year.

But Peter did not stay long enough for these things. Slowly, for he had
to face the wind, the boy started on his way to Back Potter Street.
He had hard work to keep his footing, and at the crossings it was far
worse. He made a rush to pass one of these, holding his basket tightly
on one arm, and clutching his cap with the other hand.

Poor lad! His was unlucky haste. He felt a sudden shock, a blow that
knocked him down, and sent his basket with its contents flying in all
directions. Then he knew no more. He lay still and senseless on the
ground, while the blood, streaming from a cut on his forehead, tinged
the newly-fallen snow. Knocked down and run over! That was Peter's
case. In his haste to cross the street, he had not noticed a rapidly
advancing cab; and now he was lying with a cut face, a large bump at
the back of his head, and a broken leg.

Now, I know as well as possible that all the children who read this
story will be very sorry for Peter. They will think how very miserable
it must be to have such hurts to end the old year and begin the new one
with. Well, these things are not very pleasant. But cheer up, little
friend readers. I will give you a peep into Peter's future—only a peep.
You must wait and read the story through for particulars.

This accident, sad and painful as it may seem, is to be the beginning
of a new and a brighter and better life for the orphan boy. It will
bring him friends, and be the means, by God's blessing, of leading
him to that best of all friends, the One that "sticketh closer than a
brother."

Peter did not lie long upon the cold white snow. The gentleman who was
the only passenger in the cab jumped out instantly, and bent over the
injured boy. He was the father of a little girl, one of that merry
party in the next street, to whose voices Peter had listened as he
leaned against the railings. He was on his way to fetch home the child.

"Poor boy!" said he, as he leaned over Peter. "He is quite senseless.
We must take him to the hospital without losing a moment. I was going
to fetch home my little girl, but she must wait."

As tenderly and carefully as possible, the injured lad was conveyed to
a neighbouring hospital. There he was soon restored to consciousness—a
knowledge of pain present, and more to be endured in binding up his
hurts and setting his broken limb.

It was over at last, and medicine given to soothe the boy to rest. But
amongst all his pain, the lad thought of his old friend in the poor
cellar and of the anxiety she would feel as she watched and waited for
him.

The nurse saw that Peter was troubled and restless, and kindly asked if
she could make him more comfortable.

"No, thank you, ma'am," said Peter. "I am troubled about old Sally that
I live with; she'll be sitting up, not knowing what's got me."

"It is too late to send now. The gentleman that brought you here would
have told your friends, only you did not come to yourself soon enough.
Sally shall be told in the morning, and shall come to see you, too?"

"But she'll be in trouble about me all night."

There was no help for it. It was now just past midnight, and soon the
pealing bells that had rung the old year out and the new year in would
cease their pleasant clamour. Peter must content himself as well as he
could. But when he at last sank to sleep, there were tears on his pale
cheeks, caused not by his own bodily suffering, but by the thought of
his old friend's lonely watchings, and of the fears she would have for
his sake.

Children, when you lay your heads on soft pillows in comfortable rooms,
are your thoughts ever turned in real gratitude towards the Heavenly
Father whose kind hand bestows every blessing?

It would be of no use for us to read the story of what this poor boy
did and felt, unless we were to learn something from his example. He
thought of the poor earthly friend who loved him, and was grieved at
the thought of grieving her, even though he was not to blame for what
caused her anxiety. Do you, dear children, ere you sleep, think whether
your actions will please your Heavenly Friend? Are your eyes ever moist
with tears, shed because you have been ungrateful to Him who has done
all for you?


When Peter awoke on the morning of the new year, he scarcely understood
where he was, or how he had come into this strange place. He saw that
he was lying in a very clean bed, in a long room where there were other
beds, each with its pale-faced tenant.

He tried to move, and became aware that his leg was held stiff and
straight in wooden splints. There was pain in it too, and his head
ached and throbbed. By degrees, Peter recollected what had happened the
night before, and then thought of his old friend waiting and watching
in vain.

It was a relief when the boy saw the kind face of the nurse who came to
bring him some tea. He drank eagerly, but did not feel well enough to
eat anything. The nurse bathed his face and made him as comfortable as
possible, but she noticed the tears trickling down her young patient's
cheeks.

"Does your leg hurt you much?" she asked.

"It hurts me, but I don't care so much about that. I was thinking about
old Sally, and wondering how I could sleep when she was watching for
me."

"It is very well you did sleep, poor boy," said the nurse.

She was a tender-hearted woman, and the sight of so much suffering had
not hardened her, as custom does some people. She thought about a boy
of her own far away at sea, and in her motherly fashion, she bent down
and kissed poor Peter's cheek, saying, "Happy New Year to you; here's
wishing you may soon be running about again."

How astonished she was when Peter broke out into a violent fit of
sobbing.

"What is the matter?" she said in alarm.

"Have I hurt you? Don't cry, or you will be worse, and what will Dr.
Turner say when he comes? It is his morning, and he'll be here in
half-an-hour—now, don't fret, there's a good boy."

It seemed as though every kind word made matters worse, and the nurse
became alarmed at Peter's continued sobbing. She was on the point of
leaving him to seek some remedy, when he said, "Please, don't, go—you
didn't hurt me. Only nobody ever kisses me, and—and I was glad."

"Bless the dear lad!" said the nurse. "Is that it? Well, I couldn't
have believed. Then while you are my little patient, I shall kiss you,
and you'll get used to it."

The nurse had now to leave Peter to look after other hurt and helpless
people in the same room.

And, in the meanwhile, Peter tried very hard to give up sobbing. He had
just succeeded when the nurse returned, bringing with her a gentleman
to the boy's bedside.

"Well, my boy," said the gentleman, "how do you feel this morning? I
have been kept awake by thinking about you. You will not remember me;
but you were unfortunately knocked down by the cab in which I was going
to fetch my little daughter home from a party."

"Was it in Kay Street, sir?" asked Peter.

The gentleman smiled at the question, and replied, "Yes."

"I'd been listening to them outside for ever so long. They were jolly,"
said Peter, recalling to mind the merry sounds that had so fascinated
him.

"They were indeed, until I went in and told them of the poor boy who
had got hurt and been taken to this place. It seems you had been
feeling with them in their mirth, and then they felt for you in your
pain and trouble. My little girl is in a cab outside now, and when you
are well enough, I will bring her to see you. Now what can I do for
you?"

"Please, sir, go and tell old Sally Graham where I am, and ask for her
to come and see me. And, sir, if you would—"

"Would what? I will do anything I can for your comfort, either of mind
or body."

"Well then, sir, will you please go to Robinson's shop, corner of
Potter Street—it's on your way to our place—and ask them to let you
have a woollen comforter that Peter Grant has been paying for. There's
threepence in my trousers pocket that 'll make up all the money. I
meant to give it Sally for a new year's gift, and I should so like to
have it here ready when she comes to see me."

"Never mind the threepence!" said the gentleman. "I can put the rest to
what has been paid."

"Please, sir, that wouldn't be me giving it."

So the nurse was appealed to, the coppers were taken from Peter's
pocket, and the gentleman started on his errand, much struck with the
unselfish spirit of the boy.

He found "Robinson's" easily enough, obtained the comforter, and by the
guidance of the shopkeeper was soon at the entrance of the cellar in
Number Three Court, Back Potter Street.

Old Sally Graham was on the look-out. She had not slept, and now with
heavy heart and anxious face, she was straining her eyes in the hope of
catching a glimpse of her boy coming home. It would be a sorrowful new
year for Sally unless she knew that Peter was safe.

All Back Potter Street, and Number Three Court in particular, was in a
state of astonishment when a gentleman descended from a cab and entered
the latter.

Everybody in the court knew of Peter's absence and Sally's watchings;
and when the visitor approached her abode, they somehow connected his
coming with the boy's non-arrival. The general opinion was that "Peter
had got hisself into trouble," and that the gentleman had something to
do with the police.

It was not often that the presence of a visitor in Number Three Court
was connected with good news.

"Your name is Graham, I think?" said Sally's visitor.

"Yes, sir; please, is it anything about my lad Peter?"

"Yes, it is. Don't be uneasy. He has had an accident, but he is in good
hands, and will, I hope, soon be all right again. He has been very
anxious about you, and wants to see you this afternoon."

"Eh, bless him! I am glad it isn't anything as he's done wrong. He's
been a good lad to me, but I got afraid when he didn't come home. Where
is he hurt, sir? How was it? Where is he? When may I go?" And a host of
other questions were poured out so fast that the gentleman had enough
to do to answer.

However, he did answer. And before he left Number Three Court, he gave
Sally a little sum of money, promising that she should have the same
weekly until Peter was able to help her again.

Then Mr. Russell went back to the hospital, and cheered Peter by giving
him the comforter, and telling him that old Sally would be there in the
afternoon to see her boy and receive her new year's gift.

[Illustration]



CHAPTER III.

Glad Tidings.

[Illustration] A LITTLE while after the departure of Mr. Russell,
Peter's first visitor, two more gentlemen came towards his bed. The
younger of the two was the house-surgeon, who had set his leg the night
before, and he heard him call the other gentleman "Dr. Turner."

"Have you any new cases?" asked the latter.

"Two or three. One, a boy of twelve, was knocked down and run over by a
cab last evening."

"Much hurt?"

"Left leg broken, forehead cut, and a few bruises. Quite a poor lad—a
baked-potato seller, I believe."

"Poor fellow! This is the one, I suppose. Well, my boy, how do you feel
yourself this morning? Why, bless me! I declare I must know this lad's
face. Look at me, boy. Did you ever see me before?"

"Yes, sir," replied Peter, feebly; for in Dr. Turner, he instantly
recognised the gentleman for whose visit to his cellar home he had so
long watched and waited in vain.

Yes, there by Peter's bed stood the white-haired ruddy-faced gentleman
who gave him the sixpence, and whose words, though little understood,
were the means of his giving up selling on Sundays.

"I thought so," said Dr. Turner. "You are the boy whose name and
address I wrote down, and I promised that I would call to see you
again. This is a nice new year's start for you."

"But you never came to see me, sir," said Peter, going back to his old
disappointment, and speaking in a reproachful tone.

"I never did, Peter. You see I remember your Christian name. And what
did you think of me for not keeping my promise?"

"I kept looking and looking for you, for I believed you would come. But
Sally told me that gentlefolks often promise to do things, and first
they put off, and then they forget altogether. So at last, I thought
you were just like all the rest."

"Then you really believed I had forgotten all about you, Peter?"

"If I hadn't seen you write down my name, and where we lived, I should
have thought you'd forgot them. And if I hadn't seen you put the paper
in your purse, and the purse into your pocket, I might ha' fancied
you'd lost it. I couldn't think anything but that you didn't care about
coming, after all. And I was so disappointed."

"I don't wonder, Peter; yet I was not to blame, after all. What should
you say if were to tell you my purse was stolen from me, with the paper
in it?"

"Was it really, sir? I'm so glad!"

"Well, Peter, you're a nice fellow to say that—to be glad that I was
robbed, and that some person was a thief—on Sunday night too."

The lad looked distressed, and his pale face became a bright crimson.
"I didn't mean that, sir. I'm sorry you lost your purse; but I'm glad
it wasn't because you forgot all about me that you never came, as you
promised to do."

"I understand you, Peter. I did not miss my purse till Monday morning;
and then, though I tried hard, I could not recollect your name or the
place where you lived."

"You have come to see me, after all," said Peter, with a wan smile at
his little attempt at a joke.

"Yes; and I want to help you to get better, which I shall not do if I
talk. Beside, I have ever so many more patients to see; for doctors
don't get a holiday even on New Year's Day. But, Peter, it is a blessed
thing if, by giving up a little of our own ease, we can give comfort
and rest to the suffering. I shall see you again to-morrow, and never
fear but you'll do finely; only you must keep quiet."

"Sally's to come and see me, sir," put in Peter.

"It would be better not. Well, never mind—don't fret—she shall come, if
it will make you happier."

Dr. Turner took Sally's address again, and put it in his waistcoat
pocket. "Not in the purse this time, Peter; though, if I were to lose
it, I should be able to find 'you' for a few days to come."

"Yes, sir," replied Peter, fully appreciating a bit of fun, though at
his own expense, as he lay there helpless; "I shan't run away yet."
Then he added, "I never sold anything on Sundays after that night you
talked to me."

"That's a step on the right road, my lad. And now, as you lie there,
don't be sad. Listen to those bells that are chiming so sweetly. They
are telling the tale of the new year.

"And the sun is peeping in, and casting a bright streak upon your
quilt, Peter; and I believe—I really do—that you will have a happy new
year, though you have begun it here on your back, and are likely to
stay there for the present."

Away went the doctor, and carried with him kind words as well as skill
to other bedsides, and Peter lay contented, happy, hopeful, in spite
of his hurts. Then the motherly nurse brought his medicine, and told
him he looked so bright that he was like another lad; and the pleasant
chime of bells, wafted on the wind, came with their music to his ears,
and at last lulled him to rest again.

While Peter was sleeping, Mr. Russell paid a second visit, and left
the parcel containing the "comforter," ready for Peter to present. He
also brought nice fresh grapes for the lad, and there they were like a
perfect picture when, hours after, he awoke.


In the meanwhile, too, Sally Graham had spent an unusually long time
in "tidying herself" for the afternoon visit to the hospital, and had
informed the inhabitants of Back Potter Street, and Number Three Court
in particular, of all that had befallen "her lad," as she called Peter.

The neighbourhood was astonished for the second time that day by the
presence of a second gentleman, who came in a real carriage of his
own—not a cab—and called on Sally Graham. This was Dr. Turner, who in
a few words told the old woman about his first meeting with Peter, the
reason he had failed in his promise, and all that has already been
related.

By dint of half soothing, half scolding, he made the old woman dry all
her tears; and then, finding how clean and neat she had made herself,
in spite of poor clothing, the doctor said, "I may as well save your
legs a long walk. You are not quite so young as you once were, any more
than I am, so you shall ride along with me. I have to make another call
at the hospital."

Sally was almost overwhelmed at the thought of going in the doctor's
own carriage.

And after it had disappeared from view, the inhabitants of Back Potter
Street and its courts did little else but talk about what had happened
and what else was likely to follow. Everybody prophesied all sorts of
good luck to Peter and Old Sally, now gentlefolks had begun to take
notice of them. They quite overlooked the fact that Peter was lying
with a broken leg, and would be able to do nothing towards earning
bread, for some time to come. They settled it quite comfortably that
the gentlefolks would make it all right, and that the happiest of new
years had just begun for Sally and Peter.

These neighbours did not know that a message was on its way to Peter—a
sweet message of love and peace and mercy, which he had never heard,
but which has been spoken to you, dear child-readers, many and many a
time.

A message? Yes; one meant for the ears of all mankind, for old and
young, for rich and poor—the message that angels sang in the astonished
ears of the Bethlehem shepherds as they watched their flocks by night,
little dreaming that the Shepherd of Israel was so near at hand, in the
form of a newborn babe. The "glad tidings" have not yet reached Peter;
but they will come, borne on the lips of a little child.

There was a touching meeting between Peter and old Sally, who, however,
behaved very well, considering. Sally was terribly afraid that the
doctor would not let her come again unless she was very quiet. This
made her control her feelings as far as possible, cheering the boy with
hopeful words about himself and Mr. Russell's kind help in the way of
money "to keep things going at home."

As to the "comforter" of bright scarlet wool, her new year's gift,
Sally did not know how to admire it enough. Peter insisted that she
should put it on at once, and his face was almost as bright as Sally's
smart present when she declared it was "a comforter both by name and
natur'."

Then Sally went home again, to shed in secret the tears which she had
so bravely restrained while in Peter's presence, and to realise more
than ever how very dull was the cellar in Number Three Court without
her lad to brighten it.

After two or three days, when Peter's head had somewhat recovered from
the effects of its bumps and bruises, Mr. Russell brought his little
daughter Alice to see the boy. She was a warm-hearted little thing
of nine years old, and thoughtful beyond her age. She had been very
carefully and lovingly taught by a good mother, and her great desire
was to be of some use in the world. Alice was very anxious to see
Peter, of whom her father had told her a great deal, and at last she
had leave to come and sit by him for a while.

"I am very sorry you had so much pain," said the little girl. "Are you
better now, Peter?"

"My leg often hurts me a good deal, but my head does not ache. Still,
you know, it isn't very pleasant to lie here always, when I've been
used to run about the day through."

"No, it isn't; but I hope you will get quite strong before very long.
Papa says you were standing outside that house in Kay Street Where the
party was on New Year's Eve."

"Yes; I stood ever so long. Eh, but you were laughing and making a
noise. I wished I was inside."

"I daresay, for it was so cold and windy outside. I don't know how you
could stand at all. I should have had a cold and cough, and I don't
know what beside, if I had stood there even a little while."

"But then, miss, I'm used to being out in all sorts of weather, and it
does not hurt me."

"Papa says you go out selling things; but he has been talking to Dr.
Turner about you, and he wants you to learn something better. I do hope
you will."

The lad's face brightened, and he said, heartily, "Don't I wish I'd a
chance!"

"You will have one, I know. Papa never forgets anything, and he says
he'll help you. And see, Peter, here is some cake mamma has sent you,
and two oranges. And now shall I read to you?"

"Yes, if you please, miss; and thank your mamma for sending me the
things."

"What shall we read about?"

"Just what you like, miss," said Peter, rather amused at the question.

"Well, I've got something here. It is called 'The Old, Old Story.'
Perhaps you have read it, though?"

Peter shook his head.

"Then I'll read it first. It's all about Jesus; and, as Christmas is
only just over, it will be nice. Had you a merry Christmas, Peter?"

The boy smiled. He could understand how little the child knew of "his"
world, so he just answered, "Middling, miss. But please read to me
about Jesus. I don't know that story at all, I'm sure."

If ever a face expressed astonishment, that face was Alice Russell's.
But, fortunately, she remembered that her papa had told her Peter was
very ignorant, with no parents to teach him. So she thought it best
just to read the "Old, Old Story," and let it speak for itself.

Very slowly and solemnly the child read the wondrous tale—

   "Of Jesus and His glory,
    Of Jesus and His love."

Peter listened—how he did listen! And, as the child's clear voice
sounded in the long ward, other eyes were turned towards her, sounds
ceased, and pale faces were lighted up as the words of that story which
"always seems so new" reached their ears.

The little girl's thoughts were, however, absorbed in her story and him
for whom specially she was reading. As she finished the tale of man's
fall, of God's love for sinners, which made Him give His own dear Son
to die as "the remedy for sin," she looked at Peter, while her own eyes
were filled with tears.

Her young hearer was as much stirred as herself. As she closed the
leaves of her little book, he said, "Miss, I never heard such a story
as that before. It isn't true, is it?"

"Oh yes, Peter, it is. Why, it's in the Bible, and everything in the
Bible is true. Mamma taught me about it when I was such a little girl;
and I thought everybody knew, except the poor heathen in countries a
long way off, where the missionaries go. But the next time I come, I'll
bring my Bible, and read about it there."

"Will you come again to-morrow, miss? I do so want you to read again,
and bring that story too."

"I'll leave it with you, Peter. It is not like a big book. You can
read, I know, and the print is large, so you will hold it and read it
easily. If papa will let me, and the doctors will not be angry, I will
come again to-morrow. Now, good-bye. Papa is beckoning me away."

The child went to her father, who was in conversation with Dr. Turner.
In reply to their questions, she told them what she had been reading,
and that Peter had not heard of Jesus until she read him "The Old, Old
Story."

"He wants me to come again to-morrow," she said. "Papa, you will bring
me, will you not? And you will allow me to come in, sir, won't you?"

Dr. Turner smiled, and told the little girl she should come every day,
if her papa liked.

"And I am to bring my Bible the next time. Peter has no Bible. Papa, I
thought everybody in this country knew about Jesus."

"I wish it were so, my child," replied Mr. Russell. "But here, in
Christian England, there are thousands of heathens who know nothing of
Christ. Peter Grant has had no loving mother to teach him, and there
are many who grow up just as ignorant. My little Alice will be very
happy, and begin this year with gladness, if she should be permitted
to bring the 'glad tidings of salvation' through Christ to the ears of
this poor boy. And we will pray, little one, that God may bless you,
and bring home the precious truths to this poor lad's heart by the
teaching of His Holy Spirit."

[Illustration]



CHAPTER IV.

New Homes.

[Illustration] MR. RUSSELL and Dr. Turner had soon found out how
extremely ignorant Peter was. In the neighbourhood of his poor home,
the name of God was seldom used except in blasphemy. That name Peter
knew, and that was almost all. They were anxious to teach him better
things, and now that he was obliged to lie quiet, they wished to sow
the precious seed of God's Word, in the hope that it might take root
and bring forth fruit to God's glory and Peter's eternal good.

"I believe a child would be the best teacher for Peter," said Dr.
Turner. "Let your little girl come and read to him. She is sure to
repeat her mother's lessons in the boy's ears, and we can guide her as
to what she should read."

Little Alice knew nothing except that she was to be allowed to read to
the poor boy in the hospital, but she was delighted to go and ask her
mamma for a copy of "The Old, Old Story," first to read to, then leave
with Peter. This was readily given to her, as we have seen.

To Peter the little book was a great treasure. He read it again,
and the more he read, the more he wondered. He wished for his child
visitor's return, and his face flushed with pleasure as he saw her
coming softly towards his corner of the ward.

"I've read the story three times over," he said, without waiting for
any greetings from Alice.

"And you like it, don't you?"

"Yes, only I don't understand what it means."

"I've brought my Bible, and that will tell you. Doesn't it seem strange
to have such a big book to make us understand that little thing? But
you see that 'Old, Old Story' is just Bible story turned into verses."

It would take too long to tell the particulars of Alice's lessons
to Peter. She was eager to tell, and he to learn. He asked endless
questions, and she began by reading first the story of Adam and Eve,
and then other portions of Scripture, so that he might learn about
Jesus.

How the lad was charmed with the account of the Babe of Bethlehem,
cradled in a manger! Then of the Great Physician healing all manner of
sickness, and enabling the lame to walk, all in a moment, the blind to
see, and the dumb to speak.

He learned that Christmas, with its gaily-decked shops, its ruddy
holly-berries and shining mistletoe, its good cheer and kind wishes,
had a deeper better meaning. He saw that it was a remembrance of
the time when the angels came with their song, "Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, goodwill towards men."

He, lying there helpless, realised as few can do, what joy it would be
to hear the Saviour say, "Arise, take up thy bed and walk." And he,
who had often known what hunger was, seemed to see the bountiful Giver
blessing the loaves and feeding the hungry multitude in the wilderness.
He wanted to know what had become of Jesus. Where was now this Saviour?

So, day by day, little by little, Peter heard the whole story, not only
of the life, but the death of Christ, and of His being now exalted "a
Prince and a Saviour" at the right hand of God. He lay and thought of
these wondrous things—so old a story, yet to him so new. And then he
said, "Surely He could not die for me. I was not living then."

Then the elders came in to little Alice's aid as teachers, and strove
to make plain what she could not. When Peter understood at last that
he too had a share in that great Saviour, his heart was filled with
grateful gladness and a wish to do something to show his gratitude.

Many read the story without a thought of love to this dear Saviour.
But, to the poor lad who now heard it for the first time, it seemed
wonderful that anybody could help loving Jesus.


Time sped, and Peter continued to recover steadily. He wondered
whether, after all, he should have to go back to Number Three Court,
Back Potter Street, and begin his old trade again. He shrank from the
thought of it. He had had a glimpse of a new and better life, and he
longed to see more. The hospital had been to Peter a precious ark
of refuge. He would never think of it as the scene of his pain and
suffering, but of healing and peace for soul and body.

Back Potter Street and its courts had dirt and squalor, rough, coarse
actions, and impure words as their constant surroundings. And even old
Sally, with all her love, had been able to tell him nothing of that
love "which passeth knowledge." He wanted to go on learning himself,
and that his old friend should become a scholar too. How was this to be
brought about?

The day drew near when Peter would be discharged cured. While anxious
to work, he was almost afraid to think about going out into his world
again. He would have to bid farewell to the motherly nurse who had been
so tender and kind; to the doctors, whose skill had been the means of
his cure; and, above all, to the child-teacher who had first brought to
him the message of the gospel. Why, in leaving the hospital, he would
turn his back on the best home he had ever known. Peter's fears and
doubts were soon set at rest. His friends had been busy for him, and,
after having shown so much kindness, would not now leave him to battle
with the world alone.

"So you are to go out to-day, Peter," said Dr. Turner, on the morning
fixed for the lad's discharge.

"Yes, sir," answered Peter. "I told Sally about it last time she was
here."

"That is all right enough; but we are not going to let you out of our
hands altogether yet. We have a nice place belonging to the hospital,
a few miles away in the country. It is called a 'Convalescent Home,'
and it is for patients to go to, who, like you, are well, but not very
strong. You are to go there for three weeks to get up your strength and
learn something about flowers and fields and green trees."

Peter could hardly believe his ears. What, go away into the country,
where little Alice told him the sky was so blue and the air so fresh,
and filled with the smell of flowers and the song of birds!

"By the way," said the doctor, "it will be rather early for flowers,
but the air of spring time is sweeter than any. You will come back with
checks like roses."

The boy tried to speak his thanks, but broke down in the attempt, and
then said something about what old Sally would do without him.

"She has managed so far, Peter, and you may safely trust her to Mr.
Russell and me. She is coming to see you before you go to the 'Home.'"

Peter said good-bye to his old friend, and was a little surprised to
see her in such good spirits.


What a delightful three weeks was that which followed. All was new,
strange, and beautiful. Peter's delight was only equalled by his wonder
at the marvellous works of God. Peter saw Dr. Turner two or three
times, and that kind friend promised that, at the appointed time, he
would take him home. And so he did.

Was it to the poor cellar in Back Potter Street, Number Three Court?
No, indeed. The doctor took him to a neat little cottage with just two
rooms—one of a long row, and farther out of the town, and there he saw
his old friend Sally Graham.

"Eh, my boy!" shrieked the old woman, as she seized his hand, her eyes
overflowing with gladness. "See what the doctor and Mr. Russell have
got for me; this nice little house, and I'm to have it as long as I
live, and a bit of money to keep me in victuals, too. And you 'are'
looking red and stout! Who'd have thought such luck would come out of
your broken leg on New Year's Eve?"

Who, indeed? But there was more "luck" still, as Sally called it. The
two gentlemen had exerted themselves so well that they had gained a
place for Peter in an excellent school, where he would be fed, taught,
lodged, and clothed almost free of cost.

This arrangement would not allow Peter to live under the same roof
with his old friend, and at first she could scarcely bear the idea of
parting with him. But the school and the almshouses in which Sally was
to find a home belonged to the same institution.

She would see her lad often, and he could spend his weekly half-holiday
there. Beside, it would be "a grand thing for the lad;" and this
conquered all objections.

What a change it was both for the boy and the old woman! Instead of
the racket, the dirt, and the evil habits and language of Back Potter
Street, were quiet, order, cleanliness, and decent behaviour. And,
instead of jacket-mending by old Sally, and marble-playing in the court
for Peter, they both sat on Sunday in the same church, learning more of
that old, yet ever new story of "Jesus and His love."

With all Peter's desire to do his best and show his deep gratitude to
the kind friends who had been so good to him, he found it very hard at
first to obey rules and learn lessons. After the free, uncontrolled
street life to which he had been accustomed from infancy, it was a most
difficult matter to sit still for any length of time. But Peter fought
against inclination, because he knew restraint was for his good; and
his friends encouraged him to persevere. Above all, Peter had by this
time learned another, and very precious lesson—he had learned to pray;
and when the battle was too much for him to fight alone, he sought
strength from God.


Peter was, of course, a very backward scholar, and had to sit side by
side with boys not much above half his age for a time. But a boy who
works and prays is sure to get on, and Peter made fair progress. When
three more New Years' Days had passed, there was a consultation between
Dr. Turner and Mr. Russell as to what Peter must do to earn his living.
No boy could stay in that school after sixteen years of age; and if
Peter had not been so very backward to begin with, he must have left
earlier still.

"I like the lad," said Dr. Turner; "and I would take him to learn
my own profession, but he began his education so late that it would
require many years of study beyond the ordinary time to fit him for it."

"Peter is cut out for a tradesman," said Mr. Russell. "His early
experience and natural sharpness will come in well behind a counter,
though a hard student he could never be."

[Illustration: PETER'S NEW MASTER.]

The doctor agreed to this, and Peter was apprenticed to a grocer. He
gained great favour from his master, and repaid it by doing "with his
might" whatever his hand found to do.

Old Sally lived to see her lad prospering in the world. Amongst the
lady customers whom Peter served with his own hand was one whom he
first knew as the little girl—Alice Russell—that read to him the "Old,
Old Story" as he lay helpless in the hospital, many years before. We
may be sure that it was with willing service, he supplied her wants at
all times.


Twenty years after Peter was apprenticed, and longer still after that
New Year's Eve which was the turning-point in his life, he sat at his
desk writing a letter.

It was the last evening of the year, and his thoughts were going back
to that stormy December night when he was carried, hurt and senseless,
to the hospital. What changes these four and twenty years had brought!

Here was Peter Grant, once a seller of baked potatoes, and living in a
cellar, now the prosperous and wealthy tradesman. He had followed kind
Dr. Turner to the grave with a heavy heart, several years before. Yet
his good friend had not forgotten the lad whom he had helped to lift
out of vice and poverty. He had no son of his own, or any very near
relative, so he left Peter a sum of money, which enabled him to become
a partner in the business. He is sole master now, for his old employer
and partner has retired.

And Peter has little children of his own, and a bright home, and he
is "Mr. Grant" to everybody. He has heard that the hospital which
sheltered him is in want of more help than usual; that there is not
room enough, and that if one thousand pounds could be given, and a new
wing built, the sick and poor might find shelter enough and to spare.

Peter was a grateful lad; he is a grateful man now he has the means to
do good. And as he writes the letter I spoke of, there is a happy look
on his pleasant face.

The children are drumming at the countinghouse door, for "father" has
promised to come and romp with them. He always gives the little folks
a party on New Year's Eve, and enjoys inside the shutters a repetition
of those sounds to which he once listened while leaning against the
railings outside, amid the falling snow.

"I will come directly, children," he says. And while he answers, he
seals his letter, first enclosing a slip of paper torn out of a book,
to which he adds some writing.

Then father joins the children and the romp begins anew.


On New Year's Day, the treasurer of the hospital received a letter, and
after reading it, he went with a joyful face to tell some good news.

"A gentleman," said he—"I am not to tell his name, or any
particulars—has sent a note enclosing a cheque for a thousand pounds
to build the new wing we want so much. He writes that, as a poor
boy, he received shelter, healing, and, what is better than all,
the first sound of those 'glad tidings' that the angels brought at
Christmas-tide, while he was under the roof of the hospital. And now
God has prospered him, and he desires to impart to others the same
benefits so freely bestowed on him many a year ago."

There were many, dear children, who had no idea where that letter and
the money came from. But I can tell you that the thousand pounds which
paid for building the new wing to the hospital was nothing else but
Grateful Peter's New Year's Gift.

   God will take care of you. All through the day
   Jesus is near you to keep you from ill,
   Waking or resting, at work or at play.
   Jesus is with you, and watching you still.

   He will take care of you, All through the night
   Jesus the Shepherd, His little one keeps;
   Darkness to Him is the same as the light,
   He never slumbers, and He never sleeps.

   He will take care of you. All through the year
   Crowning each day with His kindness and love,
   Sending you blessings, and shielding from fear,
   Leading you on to that bright home above.

   He will take care of you. Yes, to the end
   Nothing can alter His love for His own;
   Children, be glad that you have such a Friend;
   He will not leave you one moment alone.



                           [Illustration]



       ————————————————————————————————————————————————————————
       LONDON: KNIGHT, PRINTER, MIDDLE STREET, ALDERSGATE, E. C.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GRATEFUL PETER'S NEW YEAR'S GIFT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


